Sorting algos (#9)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2: sorting-algos/sorting-algorithms.md

| ---------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------- | ------------------------ |
| Sorting          | Organizing a collection of elements into order                                           | -                |
| Internal Sorting | Sorting an entire array in memory                                                        | in-place sorting |
| External Sorting | Sorting an array with part of the array on external storage, rather than internal memory | -                |

## Introduction

Imagine a stack of index cards, where each index card has the numbers 1 through 100. Imagine that these cards are shuffled in a random, unknowable order.

If you're given the task to sort these index cards in ascending order, what would you do?

Picture yourself. Do you scan through the pile over and over again, slowly changing the order until it's all sorted? Do you use a table and make two separate piles? Do you compare the card you're looking at always to the next card in the pile?

> If you take two people and ask them to sort the same pile of cards, they will likely have different methods.

Reviewer: "approaches" sounds more human to me than "methods" in this context
```suggestion
If you take two people and ask them to sort the same pile of cards, they will likely take different approaches.
```

- Sorting last names alphabetically
- Listing sports game scores in descending order
- Sorting employees by ID in an ascending order

Also, various algorithms improve when working with a sorted array! Recall these examples:

- Finding an element with a minimum or maximum value
    - Unsorted array: O(n)
    - Sorted array: O(1)
- Searching for an element in an array
    - Unsorted array with linear search: O(n)
    - Sorted array with binary search: O(log n)

For each sorting algorithm, we should:

1. Define and describe the sorting strategy
1. Visualize at least one example of this algorithm
1. Learn the Big(O) complexity of this algorithm
1. Practice reading the code of an example implementation

Sorting is ordering a list of elements. We can distinguish two types of sorting. If the number of elements is small enough to fit in the main memory, sorting is called _internal sorting_. There are times when the number of elements is larger than can fit in the main memory, some of them will stay in the external storage while the sorting algorithm works and is called _external sorting_. We'll scope our conversation to a few internal sorting algorithms.

## O(n<sup>2</sup>) Algorithms

> The sorting algorithms above have a time complexity of O(n<sup>2</sup>). These algorithms are fine when the array length, _n_, is small, but quickly cease to be useful as the size of the array increases. They **do** have the advantage of being relatively easy to implement and bubble sort and insertion sort can perform well in the best case, but they do not scale well. This brings in an overview of our first fairly performant sorting algorithm **Merge Sort**.

Reviewer: This sounds like we have already discussed the n^2 algorithms and are getting ready to jump into merge sort (as it was in the textbook-curriculum).

Suggest the following change to be more of a forward-looking preview to reflect the new content ordering.

```suggestion
Several commonly introduced sorting algorithms have time complexities of O(n<sup>2</sup>). These include *bubble sort*, *selection sort*, and *insertion sort*, which will be discussed in detail in the following lessons.

These algorithms are fine when the array length _n_ is small, but quickly cease to be useful as the size of the array increases. Bubble sort and insertion sort can perform well in the best case, but they do not scale well.

They **do** have the advantage of being approachable for discussion.

Moving beyond these O(n<sup>2</sup>) algorithms, we will discuss *merge sort*, a O(n log n) algorithm with a beautiful symmetry!
```
